Welcome to God Day.
I'm Derek Walker, the pastor of the Oxford Bible Church and I want to take you to John chapter 5 and one of the great healing miracles in the Gospel of John, the healing at the pool of Bethesda.
And all of John's miracles are called signs.
the signs that Jesus did.
This is the word called semion, which really means it's a miracle with a message.
And we are meant to learn the message from the miracle and apply it to us.
And basically through these signs, God is declaring, Christ is declaring what He will do for us, if we trust in Him.
At the end of the Gospel of John,
It says that John's gospel was written and these signs were written that we might believe in Jesus as the Christ, the Son of God, and through believing we might have life in his name.
And it's basically saying these signs reveal the name or the nature, the power of Christ and through believing in him, through these signs,
we are saved and we actually receive the blessing that that miracle reveals.
And so while we read about this man who was probably paralyzed at the pool of Bethesda, we need to remember this is a picture of us and what Jesus comes for us to save us.
And so through this story, this is also about what Jesus wants to do for each one of us.
So if we go to John chapter five verse one, it says, after this, there was a feast of the Jews.
I personally think it's probably tabernacles.
And Jesus went up to Jerusalem to keep the feast.
Now there is in Jerusalem by the sheep gate, a pool, which is called in Hebrew, Bethesda, having five
Now this is a lovely example of the accuracy of the Bible because this is saying that by the sheep gate, the sheep gate, which is mentioned in Nehemiah three times, it's on the north side of the temple where the sheep for the sacrifice are brought in through that sheep gate.
So it's saying that near the north gate of the temple mount, there should be a pool.
This pool
strangely has five porches and so for a long time people said you know this is just the bible making stuff up you know the liberals would say that and then in 1888 they actually started digging near St Anne's church
which was a crusader church in that region because they found a mosaic when they uncovered a mosaic with a picture of this miracle.
And so they started digging in the grounds and they discovered, lo and behold, two pools.
What it really is is two large pools with a dam one above the other, the northern pool and a southern pool and a dam between them.
And actually, it had five porches exactly the way the Bible described, because you would have porticoes, you know, colonnaded roofs going all the way around the two pools on all four sides.
And then another portico across the dam that was in the middle.
And hence, you have the five porticoes and the Bible was proved to be accurate.
And then they also found remains of a great
Byzantine church that was built on that spot because it was known as a well-known, you know, for that miracle.
And Jerome mentions this place too.
And so why were there two pools?
Well, this was actually because in the first century, there may have been originally one pool that was a reservoir for rainwater and so on, and water could then be supplied to
to Jerusalem.
But then in the first century, they got very keen on mikvah.
And this is the ritual washing that the Jews had to go through every day, and especially to go onto the temple.
And these mikvah required, you could only be cleansed if there was, in a sense, running water.
And so the ideal one, there was one on the south end, which was the pool of Siloam,
that operated as a mikvah, it had running water from the gihon spring.
But there's no spring on the north side, so what they would do in their laws of mikvah, they would actually have, you can have a reservoir and then as long as you kept feeding water from the upper reservoir into the lower pool, then that counted as running water
And then so people would go and they could wash in that.
And for the crowds of people, especially at feast time, going to the temple, they needed a big mikvah like the pool of Bethesda.
And so it functioned as a mikvah, but also it became known as a place of healing.
In fact, Bethesda means house of mercy or house of the outpouring.
the outpouring of God's mercy.
So it got a reputation that people were healed there.
In fact, that's part of the passage that we're going to see now.
And so archeology has confirmed the Bible about the pool of Bethesda, and it's a great place to go if you do a trip to Israel.
Go through the entrance.
You go off the Temple Mount, cross the street, and you go into
the grounds of St. Anne's Church, and then you'll discover it there.
And so it says, in these lay a great multitude of sick people, blind, lame, paralyzed, and all these sick people were looking for their healing, and also that was kind of the closest spot they could go to, close to the temple.
And so it says that they were waiting for the moving of the water for an angel, went down at a certain time into the pool and stirred up the water and then whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was made well of whatever disease he had.
And so there was a belief developed and it could well be, you know, that God did this as a supernatural thing, that an angel stirred up the water and then you would get healed.
Other people believed that
that this was the kind of story that grew up, but the moving of the water is when they opened up the dam and released some more water and whatever.
But anyway, people had an expectation of being healed, but now we focus on a certain man.
But we see this crowd of sick people around this pool, hoping against hope for a miracle.
And this represents sinful and sick humanity, hoping for some kind of miracle in their life.
And now we focus in on a certain man.
And again, this man represents all of us really.
It says a certain man was there who had an infirmity, 38 years.
Now that's a long time.
And he had this thing for most of his life.
And I think we're told this,
just to see that this was not some passing sickness.
This is a permanent condition that this man is in, that there was no human help available to him.
We're going to see that behind this sickness was sin, actually, in his case.
And this is a picture of us.
We are sick and we are because of sin.
The whole human race is in this
state of sickness and because of this sickness he was paralyzed which is a picture of the fact that we can't do what we ought to do.
We can't walk in God's will.
We're paralyzed because of the fall, because of sin and we are sick in our being and our physical body.
The fullness of our body is a picture of that and there is no human help available as we see in this story.
He was, in a sense, a hopeless case.
And he might have been on the point of just giving up all hope, all hope of help, 38 years.
And then it says, when Jesus saw him lying there, and I love that, God had sent Jesus to this pool, and Jesus saw this man lying there in his sickness, and
Jesus came comes to us too, and he sees us.
He sees us.
He came to seek and save the lost.
Praise God, Jesus saw you in your desperate state.
And he did something about it.
And Jesus comes to everyone in this way.
He saw him lying there, and he knew that he had been in that condition a long time.
See, Jesus saw us, saw him, and he knew.
He knew intuitively.
that he was in that lost situation.
Jesus saw us, he knows our lostness, our need, and he loves us, praise God.
And so he said to him a curious question.
He said, do you want to be made well?
And you might think, you know, that's a silly question.
Do you want, of course, he would want to be made well.
But actually, it isn't an automatic thing.
Sometimes people don't really want to be well.
Sometimes people like to be the victim.
Why?
Because you have no responsibilities.
Everyone's sympathetic to you.
Nobody expects anything of you because you're sick.
And some people are comfortable
in that situation of just lying there, not having to do anything because if you get well, then now you're expected to take up the responsibilities of life, you're expected to do things.
And so because of that, it isn't an automatic thing that people do want to be healed because they might be comfortable, you know, just receiving help and not having to do anything themselves.
And so there's a great trap in that.
And so first of all, Jesus asks this provocative question, and this particular man does want to get well.
But even so, he was in this paralyzed state.
It would have been easy for him to become passive.
And by coming to him and saying, do you want to get well, what Jesus was doing was activating his hope
and causing his will to come alive.
This is the first step to getting better is you've got to want to be set free.
It's a picture of us in our sin because Jesus comes to each one of us and says, do you want to be saved?
Do you want me to save you from your sin?
And people don't necessarily want.
to be saved, do they?
No, because they enjoy their sin too much.
They don't want to be free from their addiction because they've got used to it.
It's part of their comfort life.
And so it is a very relevant question.
God comes to us and says to us, you are lost in your sin, you are dying.
Do you want to be saved?
And that's a big question we have to ask ourselves.
Do I want to be free from that sin?
Do I want to be saved?"
And what Jesus is doing by that is activating this man's will, first of all, to say, yes, I want, I want to be saved.
And what Jesus is also doing is directing that man's attention to himself.
As we're going to see, this man did want to be helped, but he had put his trust in other people who let him down.
And Jesus is now redirecting his faith toward Jesus himself.
You see, we've got to want to be saved.
And secondly, we have got to direct our will toward God.
And the Bible says, all who call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.
We've got to want to be saved.
And then we've got to align ourselves with God's will, as we're going to see.
Jesus is actually saying through this, I want to heal you.
I want to save you.
Do you want to be saved?
Do you want to be healed?
That's how Jesus comes to us.
And he's asking us to respond and to say yes.
And when we turn our will toward Jesus in faith and say yes, I want you to heal me.
I want you to save me.
praise God, then that gives him permission to do his miracle in our life.
So while we're looking to man to be saved or to ourselves to be saved, it doesn't work.
But Jesus comes and says, do you want me to save you?
Do you want me to heal you?
And like this man, we look up to Jesus and we say, yes.
And that's how Jesus prepared him to receive this miracle.
Praise God.
Jesus just picked one man out of the crowd and came to him.
But I believe that's a picture of what he does to each one of us.
He comes to us and some people, when he asked that question, they say, no, Jesus, I just leave me alone.
But others respond like this man and they say, yes, I want you to save me.
Let's see what happens in the story.
do you want to be made well?"
And the sick man answered him, well, it's a bit of a roundabout answer.
He says, sir, I have got no man to put me into the pool when the waters stirred up, but when I'm coming, another steps down before me.
But although it's a kind of excuse he gives, but he is basically saying, yes, I want to be healed.
It's just that all my efforts have come to nothing.
I've trusted in myself.
I've trusted in other people.
It's all come to nothing.
But I do want to be healed.
And so what Jesus has done here is got him into position now.
Now this person realizes no one else can save me.
Man can't save me.
I can't save myself.
But here is one who is saying he can save me.
And he is saying, yes, I want you to help me, to heal me.
And Jesus then immediately responded by saying, rise, take up your bed and walk.
And now Jesus speaks this word, rise.
And it seems impossible.
How can he possibly rise up?
He's paralyzed.
But one wonderful thing, whenever God commands us to do something, that command is also a promise because in his command,
in his word is the power to do what he's telling you to do.
God tells you to do sometimes something that's impossible, but he's not unjust.
He wouldn't ask you to do something you can't do.
So in other words, when he tells you to do something, the power is in his word to do it.
So the moment Jesus said rise, resurrection power was released to that man.
And as that man looked to Jesus,
And Jesus said, rise, he put his trust in Jesus, and that resurrection power came into him, and he was able to rise.
Praise God.
And this is a picture of the new birth.
This is a picture.
Here we are, paralyzed in our sin.
We can't save ourself.
Man can't save us.
Jesus comes to us and says, do you want me to save you?
And we say, yes.
And then his resurrection power.
is released into our hearts that causes our spirits to be raised from death to life, praise God.
And then he also says, praise God, he doesn't just say rise, he says, take up your bed and walk.
In other words, he says, leave your past life behind where you're just lying in bed all the time.
He says, take up your bed, take up your responsibilities in life, take up
the will of God for your life and walk.
Go into a new life, walk in the will of God, praise God.
And by saying those words, Jesus imparted his power to that man to not just rise up, but also to walk and to live a new life.
And that's what he does for us.
When we receive him,
We don't just have our spirits raised from the dead, but he empowers us now by his spirit within us to live a new life, to pick up the will of God and to walk in the Spirit, praise God.
And that is a picture of salvation, praise God.
However hopeless this man was, 38 years, Jesus can do that miracle.
We were lost in our sin.
We were paralyzed, but Jesus came and raised us up and caused us to live a new life.
This is a sign, miracle, praise God.
And then it says, immediately, the man was made well, took up his bed and walked.
The power of God was released through Jesus' words and he walked.
And then as we read on it says, that day was the Sabbath, the Jews therefore, which meant the Jewish establishment,
said to him who was cured, it's the Sabbath.
It's not lawful for you to carry your bed.
He wasn't actually breaking the Sabbath in God's sight, but he was breaking some of the Jews' petty regulations they had built up about the Sabbath that you can't carry anything from one place to another.
And so they criticized him rather than being pleased that he's healed.
They criticized him for carrying his bed.
And the bed, by the way, is just a rolled up mat, really.
He answered them saying, he who made me well said to me, take up your bed and walk.
And then they asked him, who is the man who said to you, take up your bed and walk?
But the one who was healed didn't know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn a multitude being in that place.
Afterward, Jesus found him in the temple and said to him, see you have been made well.
Sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon you.
So notice that
Jesus connects his sickness with sin.
And he's saying, don't go back to that sin that got you in this mess in the first place that you've been in.
If you sin, sin no more.
And he empowers him not to sin through those words.
Sin no more, that's the worst thing come upon you.
And so this actually shows that when Jesus healed him, he also released him from the power of sin.
And so behind his sickness, again, the picture of this is mankind who is sick, outwardly sick, mentally sick and so forth, sick in his soul.
But the root cause of it is sin.
It's sin ultimately that brings the curse of sickness and so forth in our lives.
And so when Jesus healed him, this is a picture of us being delivered from sin, forgiven of sin.
released from sin so that we can now walk in the will of God and be in health, praise God.
This is a picture of salvation.
Jesus doesn't just heal us outwardly.
He gives us the power and the forgiveness of that sin, praise God.
But he warns him, he says, if you go back to a sinful lifestyle, something worse will happen.
And that man then, I believe,
He departed, it says, and he told the Jews that it was Jesus that made him well.
And again, he wasn't blaming Jesus for making him carry his bed.
He was giving glory to Jesus for making him well.
The Jews persecuted Jesus for that reason.
Why?
Because he healed on the Sabbath.
They sought to kill him, it says, because he had done these things on the Sabbath.
But Jesus answered, he actually upped the ante.
He says, my father, my father,
See, that language meant that he was the Son of God in a special way.
My father has been working till now and I've been working.
He is saying, there are many arguments why Jesus could rightly heal on the Sabbath without breaking the Sabbath.
But first of all, it was an act of mercy and that trumped any ceremonial Sabbath law.
But in this case, he's claiming deity.
He's saying,
My father doesn't keep the Sabbath.
God doesn't keep the Sabbath because God is constantly working, sustaining the universe and also redeeming people.
He doesn't take a day off.
Jesus said elsewhere, the Sabbath is made for man, not man for the Sabbath.
And Jesus is saying, just as my father's working, so I'm working.
And the Jews understood that by calling God his special father,
and putting him in the same category of God as not having to keep the Sabbath, then the Jews sought all the more to kill him because he not only broke the Sabbath, but also said that God was his father, making himself equal with God.
And then let's just point out that in the next teaching, Jesus gave the message of the miracle and he says,
in verse 20, for the father loves the son and shows him all things that he himself does and he will show him greater works than these that you may marvel.
He is saying that what the miracle that he did there was just a picture of greater works that he is going to do.
This is just a signed picture of greater works that he will do for us and then he describes three of them.
For as the Father raises the dead and gives life to them, even so the Son gives life to whom he will.
And this is the picture.
Here, this man was as good as dead.
He was useless.
He was paralyzed.
And Jesus came to him and he raised him up from his death.
He raised him, he gave life to him.
He gave a new life to him.
This is a picture of the new birth, that the Son, this is the greater work.
that the Son gives life to the dead.
When you're born again, He gives life to your dead spirit and you came alive, praise God.
And then this is also a picture of your future resurrection.
When your body is dead, Jesus is going to come to you.
Your paralyzed in death, Jesus will come to you and speak His word and He will raise you up from the dead.
and your physical dead body will be resurrected to new life.
This is the picture of what he'll do.
And then he also says that also the next greater work is that all judgment has been committed to the Son in verse 22.
The Father has given all judgment to the Son and there's a warning in this miracle as well.
Remember Jesus said,
sin no more, less something worse come upon you.
And eventually, if you make sin your master, rather than Jesus, something worse will happen to you.
He will be your judge.
Jesus will be your judge.
All judgment is committed to Jesus, and He is warning us, do not embrace a lifestyle of sin, because something worse will come on you.
If not in this life, then
ultimately eternal judgment.
And so this miracle, as it were, is a picture of the miracles that the greater works that Jesus will do for all of us.
Thank God we were that man by the Paul of Bethesda, but thank God it's the place of the house, as it were, of mercy, the house of the outpouring.
We are among those sick mankind, but
Jesus came to us.
And if you're a believer, Jesus has come to you, hasn't he?
And he said, rise.
And he raised you up from death to life.
And he is given you work to do.
He says, take up your bed and walk.
Walk in God's will and send no more.
Less something was come upon you.
This is a picture.
of salvation and as that man was healed so we can walk and praise God.
Hallelujah.
God bless you.